1. In the beginning. ) Holie Moyses telleth what was done in the beginning of the world, and so forward even til his owne time, writing above two thousand and foure hundreth yeares after the beginning. Al which being incomprehensible by humane wit or discourse, he knew partly by revelations from God, for he had the guift of Prophecie in most excellent sort; partly by traditions from his elders, who learned of their fathers. For until that time the Church had only traditions of such things as were revealed to special men, whereby we see the great authority of traditions, before there were Scriptures. And since Scriptures were written they are also necessary, for three special reasons. First, for that we are only assured by tradition of the Church, that those books are indeed holy Scriptures, which are so accounted, and not by the Scripture it-selfe, for that were to prove the same by the same, until we be assured of some part, that proveth some other parts. And this made S. Augustin to say plainly, that he could not believe the Ghospel, except the Church told him which is the Ghospel. Secondly, holy Scriptures being once knowen to be the word of God, & so of most eminent authoritie of al writings in the world, as S. Augustin, S. Hierome, & al other Fathers agree, yet for the true understanding of the same, both the Scripture it-selfe, and the ancient Fathers remit us to the Church, namely to those in the Church that are appointed by Gods ordinance, in the high place that he hath chosen. Which were the High Priests in the old Testament, as appeareth Deut. 17. Mat. 23. Joan 11. And in the new Testament, S. Peter & his Successours, for whom Christ prayed that his faith should not faile: & therefore commanded him to confirme his brethren, Luc. 22. Thirdly, for things not expressed in particular in holy Scripture, the Scripture & Fathers doe likewise remit us to traditions, and to the judgement & testimonie of the Church. Christ saying to his Apostles: He that heareth you heareth me. The Apostles doubted not to say: It seemed good to the Holie Ghost and to us. And S. Paul willed the Thessialonians to hold the traditions, which they had learned, whether it were by word, or by his Epistle.

1. In the beginning God made heaven and earth. ) Al writers ancient & later find such difficulties in these first Chapters, that some, otherwise very learned, have thought it not possible to understand the same according to the proper and usual signification of the words, as the letter may seem to be found, but expound al allegorically, as that by the waters above the firmament should be understood the blessed Angels, by the waters under the firmament wicked spirits, and the like. So did Origen and divers the follow him therein. Yea S. Augustin in his books upon Genesis against the Manichees, written shortly after his conversion, when he could not find as he desired a good and probable sense agreable to the words in their proper signification, expounded them mystically, but afterwards in his other books de Genesi ad literam, he gratefully acknowledgeth that God had given him further sight therin, and that now he supposed he could interprete al according to the proper signification of the words: yet so that he durst not nor would not addict himselfe to one sense, but that he was readie to imbrace another, lest by sticking to his owne judgement he might faile. So likewise S. Basil, S. Chrisostom, S. Ambrose, S. Hierome, S. Bede, and other greatest Doctours found and confessed great difficulties in these first chapters, which they with much studie endeavoured to explicate. And therfore it is a wonder to see our Protestant and Puritans hold this Paradox, that Scriptures are easie to be understood. Wheras both by testimonie of those that have indeed studied & laboured in them, and by a litle due consideration the contrarie is most evident. For whosoever wil looke into the holy Scriptures, shal find that sometimes in shew one place seemeth contrarie to another; sometimes the letter & phrase are obscure & ambiguous; sometimes the sentences unperfect. Againe manie speaches are prophetical, manie parabolical, metaphotical, and uttered under other tropes & figures, and that in the literal sense. Moreover there are three spiritual senses besides the literal, very frequent in holy Scripture. Allegorical, pertayning to Christ and the Church; Moral, pertayning to manners; and Anagogical, pertayning to the next life. As this word, Jerusalem, literally signifieth the head citie of Jewrie: Morally to soule of man: Allegorically the Church militant: and Anagogically the Church triumphant. And some times this (and the like of others) metaphorically in the literal sense signifieth the Church militant, & not the citie of Jewrie, as in the 12 chapter to the Hebrewes: and sometimes the Church triumphant, as in the 21. of the Apocalyps.

2. The spirit of God. ) In the Hebrew it is signified, that the Spirit of God was on the waters to make them fertile, for that fishes & birds were to be procreated therof; the word is merabepeth, incubab..s, satupon, to produce fruit (saith S. Hierom) from the waters, as a hen by her heate produceth life in the egges. And the same S. Hierom, & before him Tertullian teach, that this was a figure of Baptism, which consisteth of water & the Holy Ghost. For as water in the beginning of the world received a certaine vital vertue of the Holy Ghost to produce living creatures; so also Baptisme recieveth vertue of the same Holy Ghost to procreate new men. Wherupon Tertullian calleth Christians fishes, because they are gotten from the waters, & thence have their first spiritual life. Let it not therfore seeme strange (saith he) that in Baptisme waters give life.

16. Two great lights, & starres. ) Heer occureth another example of the hardnes of holy Scripture. For if the two great lights (to wit the Sunne & the Moone) & also the starres, were made the fourth day, and not before, as it may seeme by the words in this place, then what was that light, & in what subject was it, that was made the first day? S. Basil, S. Gregorie Nazianzen, Theodoret. & some others writing upon this place, doet thinke that the light which was made the first day remained (though an accident) without his subject til the fourth day. And albeit most other Doctours rather thinke that the substance of the Sunne & Moone, & of other planets & starres were created the first day, & the fourth day set in that order & course which now they keep, with more distinction for signes and seasons, and dayes and yeares; yet it is cleere that the foresaid ancient Doctours judged it possible, that accidents may remaine without their subject: which a Sacramentarie wil be loath to grant, lest it might be proved possible, as both these & al other Catholike Doctours believed & taught, that the accidents of bread and wine remaine in the blessed Sacrament of the Eucharist without their subjects, which Protestants denie.

16. Let us make man to our Image. )
