1. IN the beginning God created heaven and earth. 
2. And the earth was void and vacant, and darknes was upon the face of the depth: and the Spirit of God moved over the waters. 
3. And God said: Be light made. And light was made. 
4. And God saw the light that it was good: and he divided the light from the darkenes. 
5. And he called the light, Day, and the daakenes, Night: and there was evening & morning, that made one day. 
6. God also said: Be a firmament made amidst the waters: and let it divide between waters and waters. 
7. And God made a firmament, and divided the waters that were under the firmament, from those that were above the firmament. And it was so done.
8. And God called the firmament, Heaven: and there was evening & morning that made the second day.
9. God also said: Let the waters that are under the heaven be gathered together into one place: and let the drie land appeare. And it was so done.
10. And God called the drie land, Earth, and the gathering of waters together, he called Seas. And God saw that it was good. 
11. And said: Let the earth shoot forth green herbes, and such as may seed, & fruit-trees yealding fruit after his kind, such as may have seed in it-selfe upon the earth. And it was so done. 
12. And the earth brought forth green hearb, such as seedeth according to his kind, and tree that beareth fruit, having seed each one according to his kind. And God saw that it was good. 
13. And there evening and morning that made the third day. 
14. Againe God said: Be there lights made in the firmament of heaven, to divide the day and the night, and let them be for signes & seasons, and dayes and yeares; 
15. to shine in the firmament of heaven, and to give light upon the earth. And it was so done. 
16. And God made two great lights; a greater light to governe the day, and a lesser light to governe the night; and starres. 
17. And he set them in the firmament of heaven, to shine upon the earth, 
18. and to governe the day & the night, and to divide the light and the darkenes. And God saw that it was good. 
19. And there was evening and morning that made the fourth day. 
20. God also said: Let the waters bring forth creeping creature having life, and flying foule, over the earth under the firmament of heaven. 
21. And God created huge whales, and al living and moving creature, that the waters brought forth according to each sort, and al foule according to their kind. And God saw that it was good. 
22. And he blessed them saying: Increase and multiply, and replenish the waters of the sea: and let the birds be multiplied upon the earth. 
23. And there was evening and morning that made the fifth day. 
24. God said moreover: Let the earth bring forth living creature in his kind, cattle, and such as creep, and beasts of the earth according to their kinds: and it was so done. 
25. And God made the beasts of the earth according to their kinds, and cattle, and al that creepeth on earth in his kind. And God saw that it was good, 
26. and he said Let us make Man to our image & likenes: and let him have dominion over the fishes of the sea, and the foules of the ayre, and the beasts, and the whole earth, and al creeping creature that moveth upon the earth. 
27. And God created man to his owne image: to the image of God he created him, male and female he created them. 
28. And God blessed them, and saith: Increase and multitude, and replenish the earth, and subdew it, and rule over the fishes of the sea, and foules of the ayre, & al living creatures that move upon the earth. 
29. And God said: Behold I have given you al manner of hearb that seedeth upon the earth, and al trees that have in themselves seed of their owne kind, to be your meate: 
30. and to al beasts of the earth, and to every foule of the ayre, and to al that move upon the earth, and wherein there is life, that they may have to feed upon. And it was so done. 
31. And God saw al things that he had made, and they were very good. And there was evening and morning that made the sixt day.
